() = hover
[] = citation

RETREAT [title overlay img]
[jumbotron img snow or something]

Intro

In February of this year, I left town for a ten-day silent mediation retreat. During that time, I meditated with myself and others for over one-hundred hours. I expected serenity - which came - but I also experienced what felt like every possible emotion, in every possible permutation: from the most subtle to the most extreme. But most significantly, I briefly experienced an utter dissolution of any sense of being a permanent self, separate from the rest of the world.

Background

I started meditating four years ago after reading about its numerous benefits. Empirical work suggests that mindfulness meditation ameliorates stress[1], depressive symptoms, anxiety[2], and improves sustained, selective, and executive control attention[3]. Some of these changes have been linked to changes in the brain, including increased cortical density[4]. More research is needed to coroborate these findings, especially considering the replication crisis and possible publication bias in studies of meditation. That being said, the empirical benefits of the practice combined with the benefits observed in my own life have convinced me of its efficacy.

I am not a religous person. My friends know me to be militantly unsuperstitious. Still, though I started meditating for the empirically-suggested benefits, I kept meditating for the insight into my own mind.

setting

The retreat was Dhamma Vissudhi, located in Menomonie, WI, a rural region with a high density of dairy farms. It was cold, and quiet - partly due to the dampening effects of the snow, but mostly due to our vows of silence.

In a silent retreat, participants swear to avoid all communication with others, including eye contact. The purpose of the vow of silence is to create an environment where participants are minimally distracted. Participants are asked to surrender all electronic devices and writing materials for the duration of the retreat. The elimination of this distraction makes space for a more thorough exploration of the mind.

The retreat is free. You are allowed to donate after completing the retreat. Two simple vegetarian meals are provided each day. The sexes are segregated. The purpose of these restrictions is to eumlate the environment of monestaries - if you only have the most basic of possessions, and can only eat what is provided to you, you are less likely to be distracted by your own ego. E.g., if you're paying, you may feel more justified in asking for your favorite meal, or for more comfortable bedding supplies, or some other change in accomodations.

the practice

For the first three days, we practiced concentration (samadhi) meditation. We focused on the sensation of air entering and exiting the nostrils. Every time we experienced a thought or sensation that was not what we were concentrating on, we simply redirected our attention back to the breath[5]. This honed our ability to concentrate on subtle sensations. We needed this improved concentration for the next stage.

For the rest of the retreat, we practiced insight (vipassana) meditation. In insight meditation, the practitioner scans their body from head to toe, then from toe to head, paying close attention to each and every experienced sensation. These sensations naturally arise and pass away. The goal of this type of meditation is to cultivate an implicit, experiential realization of the three characteristics of reality. It is possible to understand and believe the three characteristics explicitly (i.e., conciously or intellectually). But to really change one's behavior, and really make a mark on one's life, one must understand the three characteristics on an unconcious or implict level, and the only way I know this to be possible is through a deep and sustained meditation practice.

the three characteristics

Though I do not consider myself to be a Buddhist, I believe that Gertama (sp) Buddha, and preceeding Buddhist thinkers had, through a rigorous examination on their own minds through meditation, discovered several fundamental truths about reality. This truth, that I first came to accept during my retreat, was codified by them as the three characteristics of reality. The three characteristics are: 

1. Arising and Passing
-All things arise and pass away
2. Unsatifactoriness (also known as Suffering)
-Because all things are impermanent, mundane life is imbued with an inherent unsatisfactoriness
3. No-Self
-There is no abiding, unchanging self in sentient beings

The most interesting realization of the trip was directly experincing the no-self. This is not to say that I believe that I or anyone else ceased to excist, rather, my claim is that I briefly lost all distinction between myself and objects I once saw as outside myself. I realized that there is no such thing as a "CEO-self", to borrow a term from Robert Wright[6]. The CEO-self is an entity that humans believe in by default, living behind our eyes, which is unitary, permanent, directs all our actions, is the source of our intentions, and that we are more are less conciously aware of. When someone thinks of hisself or herself, that is what they think of. Contrary to this view, I believe that the human mind is a constantly changing emergent product of several different, often competing, processess that developed at different times in human evolutionary history. I believe that I experienced this truth while on this retreat[7].

In the end, I do not expect to convince others of the veracity of the three characteristics by simply relating my own experience. i believe that it has to be personally discovered through meditation, as many others have done before me[8].

Footnotes

7. The snake and the rope

A good friend of mine once asked me if it is possible that, through a constant attention to sensory experiences while meditating, I am not glimpsing some hidden truth concerning the no-self, but am rather just, through reinforcement, conditioning myself to believe something that is not true. I could only respond by relating a Buddhist parable:

A man enters a darkened room and notices a snake coiled-up in a corner. To get a better view, he lit a candle and took a few steps closer. Taking a second look with the improved light, he was able to see that the snake was, in fact, a coiled-up rope. 

It is only through greater concentration that I have experienced the no-self. When I look closer, I can often see the self dissolve, with some regularity. These days, the realization is fleeting, but it is still clear. It feels like watching myself from above, without a head. A body, simply existing and reacting. Because I am looking closer, with greater clarity, I believe this to be an insight into an empirical truth, rather than a different mind-state reached as a result of conditioning.

6. Robert Wright, "Why Buddhism is True"

8. I know of one exception to this: the late derek parfit who came to a realization of the impossibility of a persistent self through a rigorous and critical examination of the concept. see "reasons and persons" for a detailed account of this facinating journey.

5. the goal of meditation is not to eliminate all thoughts. this is an impossible task. to illustrate, please attempt to not think of a pink elephant. inevitably, you thought of a pink elephant. the goal of meditation, rather, is to become aware of everything that is happening in the present moment, including thoughts. if you are practicing concentration meditation, focusing on the breath, and, as is very common, a stray thought enters your conciousness, the goal is to simply redirect, without judgement, your attention back to your breath. through this process, one becomes aware of the habit pattern of the mind, where all thoughts arise and pass away, like everything else in reality.

-----
structure
-----

title
header
body
-intro
-background
-location and structure
-the practice
-insight gained
-footnotes
-references
footer